---
title: 'Graduate Research: Moving in Occluded Environments'
date: 2020-11-22
permalink: /posts/2020/11/blog-post/
mathjax: true
tags:
  - Model Predictive Control
  - Autonomous Navigation

---

### How do you move around a corner?

The above question doesn't refer the mechanics of moving around a corner -- that part is simply turning either left or right, making sure you don't hit the wall. What makes the question interesting, though, is not knowing what is _around_ the corner. If you wake up in the middle of the night and need to pee, you might reason that no one is awake and so you are free to cut around the corners in your house as you scramble for the bathroom. If however you are jogging and need to round the corner of a busy intersection, you might choose to safely stay away from the corner until you know that there isn't someone or something you will run into. This kind of reasoning is natural for a human to use, but is harder to program for autonomous mobile robots (AMR).

Consider the situation shown below. A robot wishes to turn the corner and move past a series of elevators. There are two general strategies when dealing with a situation like this: cut the corner to minimize travel time or move away from the corner to get a better look down the hallway and make sure no one is exiting the elevators.

This is the topic of a paper I recently submitted for Robotics and Automation Letters (RA-L) 2021. There are many ways to tackle this problem, but I decided to focus on two more concrete problems: (1) how do I automate moving away from an occluding corner and (2) how can the robot decide autonomously that it needs a better vantage around the corner. The first question is more-or-less a path planning problem. The second point is needed because it isn't necessary to always cut the corner. 
